What is a stock market?
• Investing in equities is an important investment that we make in order to generate inflation 
beating returns. This was the conclusion we drew from the previous chapter. Having said that, 
how do we go about investing in equities? Clearly before we dwell further into this topic, it is ex-
tremely important to understand the ecosystem in which equities operate.
Just like the way we go to the neighborhood kirana store or a super market to shop for our daily 
needs, similarly we go to the stock market to shop (read as transact) for equity investments. 
Stock market is where everyone who wants to transact in shares go to. Transact in simple terms 
means buying and selling. For all practical purposes, you can’t buy/sell shares of a public com-
pany like Infosys without transacting through the stock markets.
The main purpose of the stock market is to help you facilitate your transactions. So if you are a 
buyer of a share, the stock market helps you meet the seller and vice versa.
Now unlike a super market, the stock market does not exist in a brick and mortar form. It exists in 
electronic form. You access the market electronically from your computer and go about conduct-
ing your transactions (buying and selling of shares)
Also, it is important to note that you can access the stock market via a registered intermediary 
called the stock broker. We will discuss more about the stock brokers at a later point.
There are two main stock exchanges in India that make up the stock markets. They are the Bom-
bay Stock Exchange (BSE) and the National Stock Exchange (NSE). Besides these two exchanges 
there are a bunch of other regional stock exchanges like Bangalore Stock Exchange, Madras Stock 
Exchange that are more or less getting phased out and don’t really play any meaningful role any-
more.
2.2 - Stock Market Participants and the need to regulate them
The stock market attracts individuals and corporations from diverse backgrounds. Anyone who 
transacts in the stock market is called a market participant. The market participant can be classi-
fied into various categories. Some of the categories of market participants are as follows:
1. Domestic Retail Participants – These are people like you and me transacting in markets
2. NRI’s and OCI – These are people of Indian origin but based outside India
3. Domestic Institutions – These are large corporate entities based in India. Classic example 
would be the LIC of India.
4. Domestic Asset Management Companies (AMC) – Typical participants in this category 
would be the mutual fund companies such as SBI Mutual Fund, DSP Black Rock, Fidelity 
Investments, HDFC AMC etc.
5. Foreign Institutional Investors – Non Indian corporate entities. These could be foreign 
asset management companies, hedge funds and other investors
Now, irrespective of the category of market participant the agenda for everyone is the same – to 
make profitable transactions. More bluntly put – to make money.
When money is involved, human emotions in the form of greed and fear run high. One can easily 
fall prey to these emotions and get involved in unfair practices. India has its fair share of such 
twisted practices, thanks the operations of Harshad Mehta and the like.
Given this, the stock markets need someone who can set the rules of the game (commonly re-
ferred to as regulation and compliance) and ensure that people adhere to these regulations and 
compliance thereby making the markets a level playing field for everyone.
2.3 - The Regulator
In India the stock market regulator is called The Securities and Exchange board of India often 
referred to as SEBI. The objective of SEBI is to promote the development of stock exchanges, pro-
tect the interest of retail investors, regulate the activities of market participants and financial in-
termediaries. In general SEBI ensures...
1. The stock exchanges (BSE and NSE) conducts its business fairly
2. Stock brokers and sub brokers conduct their business fairly
3. Participants don’t get involved in unfair practices
4. Corporate’s don’t use the markets to unduly benefit themselves (Example – Satyam 
Computers)
5. Small retail investors interest are protected
6. Large investors with huge cash pile should not manipulate the markets
7. Overall development of markets
Given the above objectives it becomes imperative for SEBI to regulate the following entities. All 
the entities mentioned below in Table 2.1 are directly involved in the stock markets. A malprac-
tice by anyone of the following entities can disrupt what is otherwise a harmonious market in In-
dia.
SEBI has prescribed a set of rules and regulation to each one of these entities. The entity should 
operate within the legal framework as prescribed by SEBI. The specific rules applicable to a spe-
cific entity are made available by SEBI on their website. They are published under the ‘Legal 
Framework’ section of their site

From the time you access the market – let’s just say, to buy a stock till the time the stocks comes 
and hits your DEMAT account, a bunch of corporate entities are actively involved in making this 
work for you. These entities play their role quietly behind the scene, always complying with the 
rules laid out by SEBI and ensure an effortless and smooth experience for your transactions in the 
stock market. These entities are generally referred to as the Financial Intermediaries.
Together, these financial intermediaries, interdependent of one another, create an ecosystem in 
which the financial markets exists. This chapter will help you get an overview of who these finan-
cial intermediaries are and the services they offer

3.2 - The Stock Broker
The stock broker is probably one of the most important financial intermediaries that you 
need to know. A stock broker is a corporate entity, registered as a trading member with the stock 
exchange and holds a stock broking license. They operate under the guidelines prescribed by 
SEBI.
A stock broker is your gateway to stock exchanges. To begin with, you need to open something 
called as a ‘Trading Account’ with a broker who meets your requirement. Your requirement could 
be as simple as the proximity between the broker’s office and your house. At the same time it can 
be as complicated as identifying a broker who can provide you a single platform using which you 
can transact across multiple exchanges across the world. At a later point we will discuss what 
these requirements could be and how to choose the right broker.
A trading account lets you carry financial transactions in the market. A trading account is an ac-
count with the broker which lets the investor to buy/sell securities.
So assuming you have a trading account - whenever you want to transact in the markets you 
need to interact with your broker. There are few standard ways through which you can interact 
with your broker.
1. You can go to the broker’s office and meet the dealer in the broker’s office and tell him what 
you wish to do. A dealer is an executive at the stock broker’s office who carries out these 
transactions on your behalf.
2. You can make a telephone call to your broker, identify yourself with your client code (account 
code) and place an order for your transaction. The dealer at the other end will execute the 
order for you and confirm the status of the same while you are still on the call.
3. Do it yourself – this is perhaps the most popular way of transacting in the markets. The 
broker gives you access to the market through software called ‘Trading Terminal’. After you 
login in to the trading terminal, you can view live price quotes from the market, and can also 
place orders yourself.
The basic services provided by the brokers includes..
1. Give you access to markets and letting you transact
2. Give you margins for trading – We will discuss this point at a later stage
3. Provide support – Dealing support if you have to call and trade. Software support if you have 
issues with the trading Terminal
4. Issue contract notes for the transactions – A contract note is a written confirmation detailing 
the transactions you have carried out during the day
5. Facilitate the fund transfer between your trading and bank account
6. Provide you with a back office login – using which you can see the summary of your account
7. The broker charges a fee for the services that he provides called the ‘brokerage charge’ or 
just brokerage. The brokerage rates vary, and its up to you to find a broker who strikes a 
balance between the fee he collects versus the services he provides.
3.3 - Depository and Depository Participants
When you buy a property the only way to identify and claim that you actually own the prop-
erty is by producing the property papers. Hence it becomes extremely important to store the 
property papers in a safe and secure place.
Likewise when you buy a share (a share represents a part ownership in a company) the only way 
to claim your ownership is by producing your share certificate. A share certificate is nothing but a 
piece of document entitling you as the owner of the shares in a company.
Before 1996 the share certificate was in paper format however post 1996, the share certificates 
were converted to digital form. The process of converting paper format share certificate into digi-
tal format share certificate is called “Dematerialization” often abbreviated as DEMAT.
The share certificate in DEMAT format has to be stored digitally. The storage place for the digital 
share certificate is the ‘DEMAT Account’. A Depository is a financial intermediary which offers the 
service of Demat account. A DEMAT account in your name will have all the shares in electronic for-
mat you have bought. Think of DEMAT account as a digital vault for your shares.
As you may have guessed, the trading account from your broker and the DEMAT account from the 
Depository are interlinked.
So for example if your idea is to buy Infosys shares then all you need to do is open your trading ac-
count, look for the prices of Infosys and buy it. Once the transaction is complete, the role of your 
trading account is done. After you buy, the shares of Infosys will automatically come and sit in 
your DEMAT account.
Likewise when you wish to sell Infosys shares, all you have to do is open your trading account and 
sell the stock. This takes care of the transaction part...however in the backend, the shares which
are sitting in your DEMAT account will get debited, and the shares move out of your DEMAT ac-
count.
At present there are only two depositaries offering you DEMAT account services. They are The Na-
tional Securities Depository Limited (NSDL) and Central Depository Services (India) Limited. 
There is virtually no difference between the two and both of them operate under strict SEBI regu-
lations.
Just like the way you cannot walk into National Stock Exchange’s office to open a trading ac-
count, you cannot walk into a Depository to open a DEMAT account. To open a DEMAT account 
you need to liaison with a Depository Participant (DP). A DP helps you set up your DEMAT account 
with a Depository. A DP acts as an agent to the Depository. Needless to say, even the DP is gov-
erned by the regulations laid out by the SEBI.
3.4 - Banks
Banks play a very straight forward role in the market ecosystem. They help in facilitating 
the fund transfer from your bank account to your trading account. You may be interested to note 
that for a given trading account only one bank account can be interlinked. You cannot transfer 
money from a bank account that is not in your name.
If you have multiple bank accounts, you need to specify which particular bank account that will 
be linked to your trading account. Of course you can remove the bank account and link it with an-
other bank account of yours, but that requires some amount of paper work. However, for the 
money to come in and go out of your trading account, it has to happen only via the bank account 
that has been specified and linked.
Also, at this stage, you must have realized that the three financial intermediaries operate via 
three different accounts - trading account, DEMAT account and Bank account. All the three ac-
counts operate electronically and are interlinked giving you a very seamless experience.
  3.5 NSCCL and ICCL
NSCCL – National Security Clearing Corporation Ltd and Indian Clearing Corporation are wholly 
owned subsidiaries of National Stock Exchange and Bombay Stock Exchange respectively.
The job of the clearing corporation is to ensure guaranteed settlement of your trades/
transactions. For example if you were to buy 1 share of Biocon at Rs.446 per share there must be 
someone who has sold that 1 share to you at Rs.446 . For this transaction, you will be debited 
Rs.446 from your trading account and someone must be credited that Rs.446 toward the sale of 
Biocon. In a typical transaction like this the clearing corporation’s role is to ensure the following: 
a) Identify the buyer and seller and match the debit and credit process 
b) Ensure no defaults – The clearing corporation also ensures there are no defaults by either 
party. For instance the seller after selling the shares should not be in a position to back out 
thereby defaulting in his transaction.
For all practical purposes, its ok not to know much about NSCCL or ICCL simply because, you as a 
trader or investor would not be interacting with these agencies directly. You just need to be 
aware that there are certain professional institutions which are heavily regulated and they work 
towards smooth settlement, and efficient clearing activity.
1. Before understanding why companies go public, it is important to understand the origin of 
business
2. The people who invest in your business in the pre-revenue stage are called Angel Investors
3. Angel investors take maximum risk. They take in as much risk as the promoter
4. The money that angels give to start the business is called the seed fund
5. Angel’s invest relatively a small amount of capital
6. Valuation of a company simply signifies how much the company is valued at. When one 
values the company they consider the company’s assets and liabilities
7. A face value is simply a denominator to indicate how much one share is originally worth
8. Authorized shares of the company is the total number of shares that are available with the 
company
9.  The shares distributed from the authorized shares are called the issued shares. Issued shares 
are always a subset of authorized shares.
10.The shareholding pattern of a company tells us who owns how much stake in the company
11.Venture Capitalists invest at an early stage in business; they do not take as much risk as 
Angel investors. The quantum of investments by a VC is usually somewhere in between an 
angel and private equity investment
12.The money the company spends on business expansion is called capital expenditure or 
capex
13.Series A, B, andC etc are all funding that the company seeks as they start evolving. Usually 
higher the series, higher is the investment required.
14.Beyond a certain size, VCs cannot invest, and hence the company seeking investments will 
have to approach Private Equity firms
15.PE firms invest large sums of money and they usually invest at a slightly more mature stage 
of the business
16.In terms of risk, PE’s have a lower risk appetite as compared to VC or angels
17.Typical PE investors would like to deploy their own people on the board of the investee 
company to ensure business moves in the right direction
30 zerodha.com/varsity
18.The valuation of the company increases as and when the business , revenues and 
profitability increases
19.An IPO is a process by means of which a company can raise fund. The funds raised can be for  
any valid reason – for CAPEX, restructuring debt, rewarding shareholders etc
Why do companies go public?
We closed the previous chapter with few very critical questions. One of which – Why did the com-
pany decide to file for an IPO, and in general why do companies go public?
When a company decides to file for an IPO, invariably the main reason is to raise funds to fuel 
their Capex requirement. The promoter has 3 advantages by taking his company public..
1. He is raising  funds to meet Capex requirement
2. He is avoiding the need to raise debt which means he does not have to pay finance charges 
which translates to better profitability
3. Whenever you buy a share of a company, you are in essence taking the same amount of risk as 
the promoter is taking. Needless to say, the proportion of the risk and its impact will depend on 
the quantity of shares you hold. Nonetheless, whether you like it or not, when you buy shares 
you also buy risk. So when the company goes public, the promoter is actually spreading his risk 
amongst a large group of people.
There are other advantages as well in going for an IPO...
1. Provide an exit for early investors - Once the company goes public, the shares of the 
company start trading publicly. Any existing shareholder of the company – could be promoters, 
angel investors, venture capitalist, PE funds; can use this opportunity to sell their shares in the 
open market. By selling their shares, they get an exit on their initial investment in the company. 
They can also choose to sell their shares in smaller chunks if they wish.
2. Reward employees –Employees working for the company would have shares allotted to 
them as an incentive. This sort of arrangement between the employee and the company is 
called the “Employee Stock Option”. The shares are allotted at a discount to the employees. 
Once the company goes public, the employees stand a chance to see capital appreciation in 
the shares. Few examples where the employee benefited from ESOP would be Google, Infosys, 
Twitter, Facebook etc
3. Improve visibility - Going public definitely increases visibility as the company has a status of 
being publicly held and traded. There is a greater chance of people’s interest in the company, 
consequently creating a positive impact on its growth.
So let’s just build on our fictional business story from the previous chapter a little further and fig-
ure out the IPO details of this company
IPO sequence of events
Needless to say each and every step involved in the IPO sequence has to happen under the SEBI 
guidelines. In general, the following are the sequence of steps involved.
• Appoint a merchant banker. In case of a large public issue, the company can appoint more 
than 1 merchant banker
• Apply to SEBI with a registration statement – The registration statement contains details on 
what the company does, why the company plans to go public and the financial health of the 
company
• Getting a nod from SEBI – Once SEBI receives the registration statement, SEBI takes a call on 
whether to issue a go ahead or a ‘no go’ to the IPO
• DRHP – If the company gets the initial SEBI nod, then the company needs to prepare the DRHP. 
A DRHP is a document that gets circulated to the public. Along with a lot of information, DRHP 
should contain the following details..
a.The estimated size of the IPO
b.The estimated number of shares being offered to public
c.Why the company wants to go public and how does the company plan to utilize the funds 
along with the timeline projection of fund utilization
d.Business description including the revenue model, expenditure details
e.Complete financial statements
f.Management Discussion and Analysis – how the company perceives the future business op-
erations to emerge
g.Risks involved in the business
h.Management details and their background
• Market the IPO – This would involve TV and print advertisements in order to build awareness 
about the company and its IPO offering. This process is also called the IPO road show
35 zerodha.com/varsity
• Fix the price band – Decide the price band between which the company would like to go pub-
lic. Of course this can’t be way off the general perception. If it is, then the public will not sub-
scribe for the IPO
• Book Building – Once the road show is done and price band fixed the company now has to offi-
cially open the window during which the public can subscribe for shares. For example, if the 
price band is between Rs.100 and Rs.120, then the public can actually choose a price they think 
is fair enough for the IPO issue. The process of collecting all these price points along with the re-
spective quantities is called Book Building. Book building is perceived as an effective price dis-
covery method
• Closure – After the book building window is closed (generally open for few days) then the price 
point at which the issue gets listed is decided. This price point is usually that price at which 
maximum bids have been received.
• Listing Day – This is the day when the company actually gets listed on the stock exchange. The 
listing price is the price discovered through the book building process
5.5 - What happens after the IPO?
During the bidding process (also called the date of issue) investors can bid for shares at a particu-
lar price within the specified price band.  This whole system around the date of issue where one 
bids for shares is referred to as the Primary Market. The moment the stock gets listed and de-
buts on the stock exchange, the stock starts to trade publicly. This is called the secondary mar-
kets.
Once the stock transitions from primary markets to secondary markets, the stock gets traded 
daily on the stock exchange. People start buying and selling the stocks regularly.
Why do people trade? Why does the stock price fluctuate? Well, we will answer all these ques-
tions and more in the subsequent chapters
Under Subscription – Let’s say the company wants to offer 100,000 shares to the public. Dur-
ing the book building process it is discovered that only 90,000 bids were received, then the issue 
36 zerodha.com/varsity
is said to be under subscribed. This is not a great situation to be in as it indicates negative public 
sentiment
  Over subscription – If there are 200,000 bids for 100,000 shares on offer then the issue is said 
to be oversubscribed 2 times (2x)
  Green Shoe Option - Part of the underwriting agreement which allows the issuer to author-
ize additional shares (typically 15 percent) to be distributed in the event of over subscription. 
This is also called the over allotment option
  Fixed Price IPO –Sometimes the companies fix the price of the IPO and do not opt for a price 
band. Such issues are called fixed price IPO
  Price Band and Cut off price –Price band is a price range between which the stock gets 
listed. For example if the price band is between Rs.100 and Rs.130, then the issue can list within 
the range. Let’s says it gets listed at 125, then 125 is called the cut off price
Now, everything in markets boils down to one thing. Generating a reasonable rate of return!
If your trade generates a good return all your past stock market sins are forgiven. This is what 
really matters.
Returns are usually expressed in terms of annual yield. There are different kinds of returns that 
you need to be aware of. The following will give you a sense of what they are and how to calcu-
late the same...
Absolute Return – This is return that your trade or investment has generated in absolute terms. It 
helps you answer this question – I bought Infosys at 3030 and sold it 3550. How much percentage 
return did I generate?
The formula to calculate the same is [Ending Period Value / Starting Period Value – 1]*100
Compounded Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) – An absolute return can be misleading if you want to 
compare two investments. CAGR helps you answer this question - I bought Infosys at 3030 and 
held the stock for 2 years and sold it 3550. At what rate did my investment grow over the last two 
years?
CAGR factors in the time component which we had ignored when we computed the absolute re-
tur
There are different types of traders :
a.Day Trader – A day trader initiates and closes the position during the day. He does not carry for-
ward his positions. He is risk averse and does not like taking overnight risk. For example – He 
would buy 100 shares of TCS at 2212 at 9:15AM and sell it at 2220 at 3:20 PM making a profit of 
Rs.800/- in this trade. A day trader usually trades 5 to 6 stocks per day.
b.Scalper – A type of a day trader. He usually trades very large quantities of shares and holds the 
stock for very less time with an intention to make a small but quick profit. For example – He 
would buy 10,000 shares of TCS as 2212 at 9:15 and sell it 2212.1 at 9.16. He ends up making 

1000/- profit in this trade. In a typical day, he would have placed many such trades. As you may 
have noticed a scalp trader is highly risk averse.
c.Swing Trader – A swing trader holds on to his trade for slightly longer time duration, the dura-
tion can run into anywhere between few days to weeks. He is typically more open to taking 
risks. For example – He would buy 100 shares of TCS at 2212 on 12th June 2014 and sell it 2214 
on 19th June 2014.
Some of the really successful traders the world has seen are – George Soros, Ed Seykota, Paul Tu-
dor, Micheal Steinhardt, Van K Tharp, Stanley Druckenmiller etc
An investor is a person who buys a stock expecting a significant appreciation in the stock. He is 
willing to wait for his investment to evolve. The typical holding period of investors usually runs 
into a few years. There are two popular types of investors..
a.Growth Investors – The objective here is to identify companies which are expected to grow sig-
nificantly because of emerging industry and macro trends. A classic example in the Indian con-
text would be buying Hindustan Unilever, Infosys, Gillette India back in 1990s. These companies 
witnessed huge growth because of the change in the industry landscape thereby creating mas-
sive wealth for its shareholders.
b.Value Investors – The objective here is to identify good companies irrespective of whether they 
are in growth phase or mature phase but beaten down significantly due to the short term mar-
ket sentiment thereby making a great value buy. An example of this in recent times is L&T. Due 
to short term negative sentiment; L&T was beaten down significantly around August/
September of 2013. The stock price collapsed to 690 all the way from 1200. At 690 (given its fun-
damentals around Aug 2013), a company like L&T is perceived as cheap, and therefore a great 
value pick. Eventually it did pay off, as the stock price scaled back to 1440 around May 2014
An ideal index gives us minute by minute reading about how the market participants perceive the 
future. The movements in the Index reflect the changing expectations of the market participants. 
When the index goes up, it is because the market participants think the future will be better. The 
index drops if the market participants perceive the future pessimistically
 Practical uses of the Index
Some of the practical uses of Index are discussed below.
Information – The index reflects the general market trend for a period of time. The 
index is a broad representation of the country’s state of economy. A stock market 
index that is up indicates people are optimistic about the future. Likewise when the 
stock market index is down it indicates that people are pessimistic about the future
Benchmarking – For all the trading or investing activity that one does, a yardstick 
to measure the performance is required.  Assume over the last 1 year you invested 
Rs.100,000/- and generated Rs.20,000 return to make your total corpus Rs.120,000/- 
. How do you think you performed? Well on the face of it, a 20% return looks great. 
However what if during the same year Nifty moved to 7,800 points from 6,000 points generating a 
return on 30%?
Well suddenly it may seem to you, that you have underperformed the market! If not for the Index 
you can’t really figure out how you performed in the stock market. You need the index to bench-
mark the performance of a trader or investor. Usually the objective of market participants is to 
outperform the Index.
Trading - Trading on the index is probably one of most popular uses of the index. Ma-
jority of the traders in the market trade the index. They take a broader call on the 
economy or general state of affairs, and translate that into a trade.
For example imagine this situation. At 10:30 AM the Finance Minister is expected to 
deliver his budget speech. An hour before the announcement Nifty index is at 6,600 points. You 
expect the budget to be favorable to the nation’s economy. What do you think will happen to the 
index? Naturally the index will move up. So in order to trade your point of view, you may want to 
buy the index at 6,600. After all, the index is the representation of the broader economy.
Bull Market (Bullish) – If you believe that the stock prices are likely to go up then you are 
said to be bullish on the stock price. From a broader perspective, if the stock market index is go-
ing up during a particular time period, then it is referred to as the bull market.
   Bear Market (Bearish) – If you believe that the stock prices are likely to go down then you 
are said to be bearish on the stock price. From a broader perspective, if the stock market index is 
going down during a particular time period, then it is referred to as the bear market.
  Trend - A term ‘trend’ usually refers to the general market direction, and its associated 
strength. For example, if the market is declining fast, the trend is said to be bearish. If the market 
is trading flat with no movement then the trend is said to be sideways.
  Face value of a stock – Face value (FV) or par value of a stock indicates the fixed denomina-
tion of a share. The face value is important with regard to corporate action. Usually when divi-
dends and stock split are announced they are issued keeping the face value in perspective. For ex-
ample the FV of Infosys is 5, and if they announce an annual dividend of Rs.63 that means the divi-
dend yield is 1260%s (63 divided by 5).Commonly Used Jargons 
59
C H A P T E R   8
zerodha.com/varsity
  52 week high/low – 52 week high is the highest point at which a stock has traded during the 
last 52 weeks (which also marks a year) and likewise 52 week low marks the lowest point at 
which the stock has traded during the last 52 weeks. The 52 week high and low gives a sense of 
the range within which the stock has traded during the year. Many people believe that if a stock 
reaches 52 week high, then it indicates a bullish trend for the foreseeable future. Similarly if a 
stock has hits 52 week low, some traders believe that it indicates a bearish trend for a foreseeable 
future.
  All time high/low – This is similar to the 52 week high and low, with the only difference be-
ing the all time high price is the highest price the stock has ever traded from the time it has been 
listed. Similarly, the all time low price is the lowest price at which the stock has ever traded from 
the time it has been listed.
  Long Position – Long position or going long is simply a reference to the direction of your 
trade. For example if you have bought or intend to buy Biocon shares then you are said to be long 
on Biocon or planning to go long on Biocon respectively. If you have bought the Nifty Index with 
an expectation that the index will trade higher then essentially you have a long position on Nifty. 
If you are long on a stock or an index, you are said to be bullish.
  Short Position – Going short or simply ‘shorting’ is a term used to describe a transaction car-
ried out in a particular order. This is a slightly tricky concept. To help you understand the concept 
shorting, I’d like to narrate a recent incident that happened to me at work
Intraday position – Is a trading position you initiate with an expectation to square off the po-
sition within the same day.
  OHLC – OHLC stands for open, high, low and close. We will understand more about this in 
the technical analysis module. For now, open is the price at which the stock opens for the day, 
high is the highest price at which the stock trade during the day, low is the lowest price at which 
the stock trades during the day, and the close is the closing price of the stock. For example, the 
OHLC of ACC on 17th June 2014 was 1486, 1511, 1467 and 1499.
  Volume – Volumes and its impact on the stock prices is an important concept that we will 
explore in greater detail in the technical analysis module. Volumes represent the total transac-
tions (both buy and sell put together) for a particular stock on a particular day. For example, on 
17th June 2014, the volume on ACC was 5, 33,819 shares.
63 zerodha.com/varsity
 Market Segment – A market segment is a division within which a certain type of financial in-
strument is traded. Each financial instrument is characterized by its risk and reward parameters. 
The exchange operates in three main segments.
a.Capital Market – Capital market segments offers a wide range of tradable securities such as eq-
uity, preference shares, warrants and exchange traded funds. Capital Market segment has sub seg-
ments under which instruments are further classified. For example, common shares of compa-
nies are traded under the equity segment abbreviated as EQ. So if you were to buy or sell shares 
of a company you are essentially operating in the capital market segment
b.Futures and Options – Futures and Option, generally referred to as equity derivative segment is 
where one would trade leveraged products. We will explore the derivative markets in greater 
depth in the derivatives module
c.Whole sale Debt Market – The whole sale debt market deals with fixed income securities. Debt 
instruments include government securities, treasury bills, bonds issued by a public sector under-
taking, corporate bonds, corporate debentures etc.
The day you make a transaction, it is called the trade date, represented as ‘T Day’
2. The broker is required to issue you a contract note for all the transactions carried out by end 
of T day
3. When you buy a share, the same will be reflected in your DEMAT account by end of T+2 day
4. All equity/stock settlements in India happen on a T+2 basis
5. When you sell shares, the shares are blocked immediately and the sale proceeds credited 
again on T +2 day
Dividends
Dividends are paid by the company to its shareholders. Dividends are paid to 
distribute the profits made by the company during the year. Dividends are 
paid on a per share basis. For example, during the financial year 2012-13 Info-
sys had declared a dividend of Rs.42 per share.
The decision to pay dividend is taken in the Annual General Meeting (AGM) during which the direc-
tors of the company meet. The dividends are not paid right after the announcement. This is be-
cause the shares are traded throughout the year and it would be difficult to identify who gets the 
dividend and who doesn’t. The following timeline would help you understand the dividend cycle.
Dividend Declaration Date: This is the date on which the AGM takes place and the company’s 
board approves the dividend issue
Record Date: This is the date on which the company decides to review the shareholders register to 
list down all the eligible shareholders for the dividend. Usually the time difference between the 
dividend declaration date and record date is at least 30 days
Ex Date/Ex Dividend date: The ex dividend date is normally set two business days before the re-
cord date. Only shareholders who own the shares before the ex dividend date are entitled to the 
dividend. This is because in India the normal settlement is on T+2 basis. So for all practical pur-
poses if you want to be entitled for dividend you need to ensure you buy the shares before the ex 
dividend date.
Dividend Payout Date: This is the day on which the dividends are paid out to shareholders listed in 
the register of the company.
Cum Dividend: The shares are said to be cum dividend till the ex dividend date
Bonus Issue
A bonus issue is a stock dividend, allotted by the company to reward the 
shareholders. The bonus shares are issued out of the reserves of the com-
pany. These are free shares that the shareholders receive against shares that 
they currently hold. These allotments typically come in a fixed ratio such as, 
1:1, 2:1, 3:1 etc.
If the ratio is 2:1 ratio, the existing shareholders get 2 additional shares for every 1 share they 
hold at no additional cost. So if a shareholder owns 100 shares then he will be issued an addi-
tional 200 shares, so his total holding will become 300 shares. When the bonus shares are issued, 
the number of shares the shareholder holds will increase but the overall value of investment will 
remain the same
Stock Split
The word stock split- for the first time sounds weird but this happens on a regular 
basis in the markets. What this means is quite obvious – the stocks that you hold 
actually are split!
When a stock split is declared by the company the number of shares held increases but the invest-
ment value/market capitalization remains the same similar to bonus issue. The stock is split with 
reference to the face value. Suppose the stock’s face value is Rs.10, and there is a 1:1 stock split 
then the face value will change to Rs.5. If you owned 1 share before split you would now own 2 
shares after the split
 Monetary Policy
The monetary policy is a tool with which the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) controls the money sup-
ply by controlling the interest rates. They do this by tweaking the interest rates. RBI is India’s cen-
tral bank. World over every country’s central bank is responsible for setting the interest rates.
While setting the interest rates the RBI has to strike a balance between growth and inflation. In a 
nutshell – if the interest rates are high that means the borrowing rates are high (particularly for 
corporations). If corporate can’t borrow easily they cannot grow. If corporations don’t grow, the 
economy slows down.
On the other hand when the interest rates are low, borrowing becomes easier. This translates to 
more money in the hands of the corporations and consumers. With more money there is in-
creased spending which means the sellers tend to increase prices leading to inflation.
In order to strike a balance, the RBI has to consider all the factors and should carefully set a few 
key rates. Any imbalance in these rates can lead to an economic chaos. The key RBI rates that you 
need to track are as follows:
Repo Rate – Whenever banks want to borrow money they can borrow from the RBI. The rate at 
which RBI lends money to other banks is called the repo rate. If repo rate is high that means the 
cost of borrowing is high, leading to a slow growth in the economy. Currently, the repo rate in In-
dia is 8%. Markets don’t like the RBI increasing the repo rates.
Reverse repo rate – Reverse Repo rate is the rate at which RBI borrows money from banks. When 
banks lend money to RBI they are certain that RBI will not default, and hence they are happier to 
lend their money to RBI as opposed to a corporate. However when banks choose to lend money 
to the RBI instead of the corporate entity, the supply of money in the banking system reduces. An 
increase in reverse repo rate is not great for the economy as it tightens the supply of money. The 
reverse repo rate is currently at 7%.
Cash reserve ratio (CRR) – Every bank is mandatorily required to maintain funds with RBI. The 
amount that they maintain is dependent on the CRR. If CRR increases then more money is re-
moved from the system, which is again not good for the economy.
The RBI meets every quarter to review the rates. This is a key event that the market watches out 
for. The first to react to rate decisions would be interest rate sensitive stocks across various sec-
tors such as – banks, automobile, housing finance, real estate, metals
 Inflation
Inflation is a sustained increase in the general prices of goods and services. Increasing inflation 
erodes the purchasing power of money. All things being equal, if the cost of 1 KG of onion has in-
creased from Rs.15 to Rs.20 then this price increase is attributed to inflation. Inflation is inevita-
ble but a high inflation rate is not desirable as it could lead to economic uneasiness. A high level 
of inflation tends to send a bad signal to markets. Governments work towards cutting down the 
inflation to a manageable level. Inflation is generally measured using an index. If the index is go-
ing up by certain percentage points then it indicates rising inflation, likewise index falling indi-
cates inflation cooling off.
There are two types of inflation indices – Wholesale Price Index (WPI) and Consumer Price Index 
(CPI).
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) – The WPI indicates the movement in prices at the wholesale level. It 
captures the price increase or decrease when they are sold between organizations as opposed to 
actual consumers. WPI is an easy and convenient method to calculate inflation. However the infla-
tion measured here is at an institutional level and does not necessarily capture the inflation expe-
rienced by the consumer.
As I write this, the WPI inflation for the month of May 2014 stands at 6.01%.
Consumer Price Index (CPI)- The CPI on the other hand captures the effect of the change in prices 
at a retail level. As a consumer, CPI inflation is what really matters. The calculation of CPI is quite 
detailed as it involves classifying consumption into various categories and sub categories across 
urban and rural regions. Each of these categories is made into an index. This means the final CPI 
index is a composition of several internal indices.
The computation of CPI is quite rigorous and detailed. It is one of the most critical metrics for 
studying the economy.  A national statistical agency called the Ministry of Statistics and Pro-
gramme implementation (MOSPI) publishes the CPI numbers around the 2nd week of every 
month
 Index of Industrial Production (IIP)
The Index of Industrial Production (IIP)  is a short term indicator of how the industrial sector in 
the country is progressing. The data is released every month (along with inflation data) by Minis-
try of Statistics and Programme implementation (MOSPI). As the name suggests, the IIP meas-
ures the production in the Indian industrial sectors keeping a fixed reference point. As of today, 
India uses the reference point of 2004-05. The reference point is also called the base year.
Roughly about 15 different industries submit their production data to the ministry, which collates 
the data and releases it as an index number. If the IIP is increasing it indicates a vibrant industrial 
environment (as the production is going up) and hence a positive sign for the economy and mar-
kets. A decreasing IIP indicates a sluggish production environment, hence a negative sign for the 
economy and markets.
To sum up, an upswing in the industrial production is good for the economy and a downswing 
rings an alarm. As India is getting more industrialized, the relative importance of the Index of In-
dustrial Production is increasing
Purchasing Managers Index (PMI)
The Purchasing managers index (PMI) is an economic indicator which tries to capture the busi-
ness activity across the manufacturing and service sectors in the country. This is a survey based 
indicator where the respondents – usually the purchasing managers indicate their change in busi-
ness perception with respect to the previous month. A separate survey is conducted for the serv-
ice and the manufacturing sectors. The data from the survey is consolidated on to a single index. 
Typical areas covered in the survey include factors such as new orders, output, business expecta-
tions and employment amongst others.
The PMI number usually oscillates around 50. A reading above 50 indicates expansion and below 
50 indicates a contraction in the economy. And a reading at 50 indicates no change in the econ-
omy
 Budget
The Budget is an event during which the Ministry of Finance discusses the country’s finance in de-
tail. The Finance Minister on behalf of the ministry makes a budget presentation to the entire 
country. During the budget, major policy announcements and economic reforms are announced 
which has an impact on various industries across the markets. Therefore the budget plays a very 
important role in the economy
To illustrate this further, one of the expectations for the budget (July 2014) was to increase the du-
ties on cigarette. As expected, during the budget, the Finance Minister raised the duties on ciga-
rette, and hence the prices of cigarettes were also increased. An increased cigarette price has a 
few implications:
1. Increased cigarette prices discourage smokers from buying cigarettes (needless to say this is 
a debatable) and hence the profitability of the cigarette manufacturing companies such as ITC 
decreases. If the profitability decreases then investors may want to sell shares of ITC.
2. If market participants start selling ITC, then the markets will come down because ITC is an 
index heavy weight.
In fact as a reaction to the budget announcement ITC traded 3.5% lower for this precise reason.
Budget is an annual event and it is announced during the last week of February. However under 
certain special circumstances such as a new government formation the budget announcement 
could be delayed
 - Corporate Earnings Announcement
This is perhaps one of the important events to which the stocks react. The listed companies (trad-
ing on stock exchange) are required to declare their earning numbers once in every quarter, also 
called the quarterly earning numbers. During an earnings announcement the corporate gives out 
details on various operational activities including..
1. How much revenue the company has generated?
2. How has the company managed its expense?
3. How much money the company paid in terms of taxes and interest charges?
4. What is the profitability during the quarter?
Besides some companies give an overview of what they expect from the upcoming quarters. This 
forecast is called the ‘corporate guidance’